RFC: Replace positional args to Buildpack executables with env vars (#190)
buildpacks/rfcs: text/0000-buildpack-input-vars.md

- Start Date: 2021-11-18
- Author(s): [jkutner](https://github.com/jkutner)
- Status: Draft Draft
- RFC Pull Request: (leave blank)
- CNB Pull Request: (leave blank)
- CNB Issue: (leave blank)
- Supersedes: N/A

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

This is a proposal to replace the positional arguments of Buildpack executables with named environment variables.

# Definitions
[definitions]: #definitions

- *positional arguments* - values passed into an executable command such that they are accessible as `$1`, `$2`, etc

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

Postional arguments to Buildpack executables have been the way for the buildpack execution engine to provide inputs for buildpacks since buildpacks v1 was created. However, positional arguments are limiting, and what they represent is not obvious without reading the spec.

In the spec today they are defined as:

* `/bin/detect <platform[AR]> <plan[E]>`
* `/bin/build <layers[EIC]> <platform[AR]> <plan[ER]>`

Using env vars helps make these inputs more easily accesible from language bindings like [libcnb.bash](https://github.com/jkutner/libcnb.bash).

# What it is
[what-it-is]: #what-it-is

> We will deprecate the positional arguments to `bin/detect` and `bin/build` with the following environment variables:

Reviewer: While I think that's true, this is a pretty big shift change. How many of these kind of changes do we want to make?

> We will deprecate the positional arguments to `bin/detect` and `bin/build` with the following environment variables:

Reviewer 2: If we want to make this change I think there are two options are
1. **option 1 - no deprecation** requires buildpack authors to migrate to the new usage when they adopt buildpack API 0.10 (or whatever API it lands in)
2. **option 2 - deprecation** requires buildpack authors to migrate to the new usage when they adopt buildpack API 0.17 (or whatever API it is removed in)

The way I see it the amount of total pain is the same in both cases and delaying the migration until we remove a bunch of deprecated features all at once, isn't necessarily better for buildpack authors. I would feel differently if users had to migrate to upgrade the lifecycle, but they can run the latest lifecycle and stay on the current API as long as they like (until we deprecate and remove the API).

> We will deprecate the positional arguments to `bin/detect` and `bin/build` with the following environment variables:

Author: With any breaking change, I think we need to compare the burden of supporting backwards compat with the burden we put on our users/community to migrate. In this case, the burden to migrate can be very high (I would compare it to the addition of the `[types]` table in layer toml). At the same time, I don't see how continuing to support the env vars adds "complexity".

We only get to make so many breaking changes before people stop upgrading, or leave the community. I think #172 consumes our budget for that tolerance.

> We will deprecate the positional arguments to `bin/detect` and `bin/build` with the following environment variables:

Author: @ekcasey i'm not proposing we remove the positional args at all

### bin/detect

* `CNB_PLATFORM_DIR` - replaces the first positional argument to `bin/build`. Uses the same env var name as the Platform spec.

> * `CNB_PLAN_PATH` - replaces the second positional argument to `bin/build`. Uses the same env var name as the Platform spec.

Reviewer: as far as naming goes, do we use `DIR` for directories and `PATH` for files? Just wondering if we should take the time to standardize here (if needed).

Author: I believe @sclevine was pretty consistent with this in other places in the spec, which is why I adopted it

> * `CNB_PLAN_PATH` - replaces the second positional argument to `bin/build`. Uses the same env var name as the Platform spec.

Reviewer 2: This file is a buildpack specific [build plan](https://github.com/buildpacks/spec/blob/main/buildpack.md#build-plan-toml). which is different from the [plan.toml](https://github.com/buildpacks/spec/blob/main/platform.md#plantoml-toml) which is referred to with `CNB_PLAN_PATH` in the platform spec.

This build plan is also different from the [buildpack plan](https://github.com/buildpacks/spec/blob/main/platform.md) we are using `CNB_PLAN_PATH` to reference in the builld interface below.

Using the same name for three different files with three different schemas might be confusing.

Maybe instead we could go with `CNB_BUILD_PLAN_PATH` and `CNB_BP_PLAN_PATH`? Or a better idea if anyone has one?

Author: `CNB_BUILD_PLAN_PATH` seems good.

Author: done

> * `CNB_PLAN_PATH` - replaces the second positional argument to `bin/build`. Uses the same env var name as the Platform spec.

Author: ```suggestion
* `CNB_BUILD_PLAN_PATH` - replaces the second positional argument to `bin/build`. Uses the same env var name as the Platform spec.
```

### bin/build

> * `CNB_BP_LAYERS_DIR` - replaces the first positional argument to `bin/build`. Uses `_BP_` to differentiate it from the `CNB_LAYERS_DIR` in the Plaform spec, which is a different value.

Reviewer 3: I don't like that we're sacrificing a common env var name in the buildpack spec for a rarely-used env var in the platform spec. How do we feel about renaming the platform one?

Otherwise, buildpack authors will wonder why it's not `CNB_BP_PLAN_PATH`, etc.

Reviewer: Does this require buildpack/platform APIs to change in lock step are we ok with the overlap?

Reviewer 4: The lifecycle should be able to handle the overlapping case, so I think it's up to the team's discretion.

Reviewer 2: > Does this require buildpack/platform APIs to change in lock step are we ok with the overlap?

Even if you release them both simultaneously most people will experience an overlap anyways as new buildpacks will run on old platforms.

Author: @sclevine any preference on the new platform env var name?

Reviewer 3: `CNB_PARENT_LAYERS_DIR`

[definitions]: #definitions

- *positional arguments* - values passed into an executable command such that they are accessible as `$1`, `$2`, etc

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

Postional arguments to Buildpack executables have been the way for the buildpack execution engine to provide inputs for buildpacks since buildpacks v1 was created. However, positional arguments are limiting, and what they represent is not obvious without reading the spec.

In the spec today they are defined as:

* `/bin/detect <platform[AR]> <plan[E]>`
* `/bin/build <layers[EIC]> <platform[AR]> <plan[ER]>`

Using env vars helps make these inputs more easily accesible from language bindings like [libcnb.bash](https://github.com/jkutner/libcnb.bash).

# What it is
[what-it-is]: #what-it-is

We will deprecate the positional arguments to `bin/detect` and `bin/build` with the following environment variables:

### bin/detect

* `CNB_PLATFORM_DIR` - replaces the first positional argument to `bin/build`. Uses the same env var name as the Platform spec.
* `CNB_BUILD_PLAN_PATH` - replaces the second positional argument to `bin/build`. Uses the same env var name as the Platform spec.

### bin/build

> * `CNB_LAYERS_DIR` - replaces the first positional argument to `bin/build`. **Note:** `CNB_LAYERS_DIR` conflicts with the platform spec, which will beupdated to rename its `CNB_LAYERS_DIR` to `CNB_PARENT_LAYERS_DIR`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `CNB_LAYERS_DIR` - replaces the first positional argument to `bin/build`. **Note:** `CNB_LAYERS_DIR` conflicts with the platform spec, which will be updated to rename its `CNB_LAYERS_DIR` to `CNB_PARENT_LAYERS_DIR`.
```

- RFC Pull Request: (leave blank)
- CNB Pull Request: (leave blank)
- CNB Issue: (leave blank)
- Supersedes: N/A

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

This is a proposal to replace the positional arguments of Buildpack executables with named environment variables.

# Definitions
[definitions]: #definitions

- *positional arguments* - values passed into an executable command such that they are accessible as `$1`, `$2`, etc

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

Postional arguments to Buildpack executables have been the way for the buildpack execution engine to provide inputs for buildpacks since buildpacks v1 was created. However, positional arguments are limiting, and what they represent is not obvious without reading the spec.

In the spec today they are defined as:

* `/bin/detect <platform[AR]> <plan[E]>`
* `/bin/build <layers[EIC]> <platform[AR]> <plan[ER]>`

Using env vars helps make these inputs more easily accesible from language bindings like [libcnb.bash](https://github.com/jkutner/libcnb.bash).

# What it is
[what-it-is]: #what-it-is

We will deprecate the positional arguments to `bin/detect` and `bin/build` with the following environment variables:

### bin/detect

> * `CNB_PLATFORM_DIR` - replaces the first positional argument to `bin/build`. Uses the same env var name as the Platform spec.

Reviewer 5: /queue-issue buildpacks/lifecycle "Add CNB_PLATFORM_DIR and CNB_BUILD_PLAN_PATH to bin/detect"

* `CNB_BUILD_PLAN_PATH` - replaces the second positional argument to `bin/build`. Uses the same env var name as the Platform spec.

### bin/build

> * `CNB_LAYERS_DIR` - replaces the first positional argument to `bin/build`. **Note:** Uses the same env var name as the Platform spec, but refers to a different location.

Reviewer 5: /queue-issue buildpacks/lifecycle "Add CNB_LAYERS_DIR, CNB_PLATFORM_DIR and CNB_BP_PLAN_PATH to bin/build"
